---
title: How to deal with the fiscal and taxation of policy relocation by way of property rights replacement
date: 2022-5-24
---
In practice, the compensation method for house replacement is highly welcomed by the relocating enterprises. When an enterprise is expropriated and decides to relocate, the demolition party, the government, will negotiate with the demolished enterprise on compensation for demolition and relocation. The enterprise can choose monetary compensation, plant resettlement compensation, and factory resettlement compensation form, which belongs to the enterprise demolition property right replacement. How to deal with the fiscal and taxation of policy relocation adopting the method of property rights replacement?
<!-- more -->
1. Accounting treatment of property rights replacement. If an enterprise chooses property rights exchange compensation, whether it is a policy relocation or a commercial demolition, it is regarded as a non-monetary asset exchange, and it should be further judged whether the matter has commercial substance. If the future cash flow of the demolished real estate of the enterprise is significantly different from the real estate exchanged in terms of risk, time and amount, or the difference between the estimated future cash flow of the real estate exchanged in and out of the real estate is significant compared with the fair value of the asset, it means that the property right The exchange has a commercial substance. If the property rights exchange has commercial substance, the fair value of the demolished real estate and the relevant taxes and fees paid for receiving the new real estate should be used as the entry cost of the real estate; the difference between the fair value and the book value of the demolished real estate should be included in the current profit and loss. If there is conclusive evidence that the fair value of the real estate exchanged is more reliable, the fair value of the real estate exchanged and the relevant taxes and fees paid should be used as the entry cost of the real estate exchanged. If the exchange of property rights does not have commercial substance, the book value of the property to be demolished and the relevant taxes and fees paid shall be used as the entry cost of the property exchange, and no profit or loss will be recognized. In actual operation, it is a complicated process to determine whether the exchange of property rights is of commercial substance. The standards do not have specific criteria for judging business substance, and the “significant” and “significant” mentioned are not specifically quantified, and they are easily affected by factors such as the nature of the industry, the size of the enterprise, and the subjective judgment of accountants. Secondly, the estimation of the present value of future cash flows is affected by factors such as calculation models, forecasts for the future, and financial staff's risk appetite. Therefore, the judgment of whether there is a commercial substance is subjective.
Example: Company A is a policy-based relocation, and it chooses the method of property rights replacement, and it is determined that it has no commercial substance. The original real estate value of the demolished company has risen to 50 million yuan (already assessed), and the value of the real estate exchanged is also 50 million yuan, without monetary compensation. The original book value of the invested real estate is 30 million yuan, and the accumulated depreciation is 15 million yuan. The accounting treatment of property rights replacement real estate is as follows:
Borrow: fixed assets-new house 1500
Accumulated depreciation 1500
Loan: fixed assets-old houses 3000
Note: First, if the exchange of non-monetary assets does not have commercial substance, or although it has commercial substance but the fair value of the exchanged assets cannot be reliably measured, the original book value of the exchanged assets shall be calculated based on the total original book value of the exchanged assets. Proportion, to allocate the total cost of exchanged assets, and determine the cost of each exchanged asset. Second, when an enterprise uses the book value of the swapped-out asset and the relevant taxes and fees as the cost of the swap-in asset, if a premium occurs, it should be dealt with in the following situations: If the premium is paid, the book value of the swapped-out asset should be used The value, plus the premium paid and the relevant taxes and fees payable, is used as the cost of the asset exchanged in, and no profit or loss is recognized; if the premium is received, the book value of the asset exchanged should be used, minus the premium received, and Add the relevant taxes and fees that should be paid as the cost of the assets exchanged in, and no profit or loss is recognized.
2. Tax-related treatment of property rights replacement. In terms of taxation, generally speaking, non-monetary transactions are regarded as buying and selling. Therefore, the exchange of property rights will involve the processing of value-added tax, land value-added tax, corporate income tax, deed tax, and stamp tax.
2.1 Value added tax. According to the "Notice of the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Taxation on Comprehensively Launching the Pilot Work for the Reform of Business Tax to Value-Added Tax" (Caishui [2016] No. 36) Annex 3 of the pilot business tax reform to VAT: "I. The following items are exempt from VAT...(37) The land owner transfers the land use right, and the land user returns the land use right to the land owner...According to the "Announcement of the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Taxation on Clarifying the Value-Added Tax Policy for the Gratuitous Transfer of Stocks" (Ministry of Finance) State Administration of Taxation Announcement 2020 No. 40) Article 3 stipulates: "The behavior of land owners to requisition land in accordance with the law and pay land users for land and related tangible movable and real property compensation fees falls under the "Policy Regulations" (Financial Tax [2016] [Promulgated No. 36) The circumstances in which the land user returns the land use right as stipulated in Article 1 (37). Therefore, the essence of government property rights exchange is to recover land use rights, compensate with non-monetary assets, and exempt the compensation of expropriated land, real property and tangible movable property from value-added tax.
2.2 Land appreciation tax. According to Article 8 of the "Interim Regulations on Land Value-added Tax of the People's Republic of China", real estate collected and recovered in accordance with the law for state construction shall be exempt from land value-added tax. According to Article 11 of the "Implementation Rules of the Interim Regulations on Land Value-added Tax of the People's Republic of China": "...In accordance with Article 8(2), the real estate expropriated and repossessed in accordance with the law refers to the use of real estate approved by the government for use in urban areas. Real estate or land use rights for implementation of planning and national construction are exempted if relocation is required due to urban implementation planning and national construction, and taxpayers transfer the original real estate by themselves. Units and individuals meeting the above-mentioned tax exemption regulations must apply to the tax authority where the real estate is located Tax exemption, land value added tax shall be exempted after review by the tax authority. An application is submitted to the tax authority where the real estate is located, and land value added tax can be exempted after review by the tax authority. If the above regulations are not met, land value added tax shall be paid in accordance with the regulations.
2.3 Corporate income tax. For policy-related relocation, the compensation income for demolition shall be calculated according to the corporate income tax. According to the "Announcement of the State Administration of Taxation on Issues Concerning Income Taxes on the Policy-Based Relocation of Enterprises" (State Administration of Taxation Announcement No. 11, 2013), if an enterprise's policy-based relocation applies for assets, if asset replacement is used, the taxable cost of the acquired assets shall be The net value of the acquired assets, plus the taxes and fees paid for the acquired assets (including the premium, plus the premium) is calculated and determined. That is, if the policy relocation adopts non-monetary asset replacement, no income is recognized in the corporate income tax treatment. If it is determined that there is no commercial substance, it is in line with corporate accounting treatment. Accounting treatment does not affect profit and loss, and there is no tax difference. No tax adjustments are required. Conversely, if the accounting treatment determines that it has a commercial substance, the profit and loss recognized by the accounting should be adjusted accordingly.
2.4 Deed tax. The deed tax law stipulates: "When land and houses are requisitioned or the people's government at or above the county level, the provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities may decide to exempt or reduce the deed tax." The government's preferential policies for collection, collection, and re-acquisition of the deed tax on house ownership, specific provisions Varies from place to place. Taking Hubei Province as an example, the "Determination of the Specific Applicable Tax Rates and Exemption Measures of Deed Tax in Hubei Province" clarified: Because land and houses are expropriated and requisitioned by people's governments at or above the county level, monetary compensation and repurchase of land and houses are selected, and the transaction price does not exceed Part of the monetary compensation is exempt from deed tax, and the excess part is exempted from deed tax; house replacement and land use right replacement choose to be exempt from deed tax, and no price difference will be paid. If the difference is paid, a deed tax is imposed on the difference.
2.5 Stamp duty. According to the "Stamp Tax Law of the People's Republic of China", the taxable income of stamp tax refers to the contracts, property rights transfer documents and corporate account books listed in the "Stamp Tax Items and Tax Rate Table". In contrast, vouchers that are not listed do not need to pay stamp duty. The demolition compensation contract is not included in the list, so stamp duty should not be paid. However, stamp duty must be paid in accordance with the law of the real property exchanged.