---
title: How to apply the method of auditing and levying individual income tax on equity investments such as stocks held by individual proprietorship enterprises and partnership enterprises?
date: "2022/5/24"
---
The "Announcement on the Collection and Administration of Individual Income Tax on Equity Investment Income" (Announcement No. 41 of 2021 of the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Taxation) stipulates that: Enterprise), personal income tax is calculated and levied according to the reconciliation method.
Pay attention to the word "universal" in the above regulations, and prohibit the use of approved expropriation in various places.
Why did the finance and taxation department issue a document to ban local practices before the holiday at the end of the year? This is because the actual tax burden for approved and audited taxation is very different.
<!-- more -->
Let me talk about the personal income tax levied on equity investment in a sole proprietorship partnership under normal circumstances:
1. Tax treatment of interest, dividends and bonuses allocated to the company's foreign investment
Article 2 of Guoshuihan [2001] No. 84 stipulates that the interest, dividends, and bonuses obtained by individual proprietorships and partnerships from overseas investments shall not be included in the income of the enterprise, and shall be separately used as interest, dividends, and bonuses for individual investors. The income is calculated and paid according to the taxable items of "interest, dividends and bonus income". Where interest, dividends, and bonuses are returned for foreign investments in the name of a partnership, the interest, dividends, and bonuses of each investor shall be determined in accordance with the spirit of Article 5 attached to Caishui (2000) 91. The "dividend income" tax calculation item is the calculation and payment of personal income tax.
When calculating and paying personal income tax for the taxable items of "interest, dividends, and bonus income", the tax rate is 20%, and the income is directly regarded as taxable income without deduction. Simply put, to get "interest, dividends, dividends" of 1 million yuan, you directly need to pay 200,000 yuan in taxes.
The purpose of this provision is to ensure that the tax burdens of natural person shareholders of limited liability companies and investors of sole proprietorship partnerships are fair, and the actual tax burden cannot be immediately reduced by wearing a "vest." Sole proprietorship partnership.
2. Income from investment transfer is subject to personal income tax based on "business income"
Article 2 of the "Notice of the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Taxation on the Income Tax Issues for Partnership Business Partners" (Caishui [2008] No. 159) stipulates that the partners of partnership enterprises are taxpayers. If the partners of a partnership enterprise are natural persons, they shall pay individual income tax; if the partners are legal persons or other organizations, they shall pay enterprise income tax.
Therefore, according to Article 2 of Guoshuihan [2001] No. 84, interest income, dividend income, and dividend income must be paid separately in addition to tax. For the income obtained by a sole proprietorship partnership, all sole proprietorship and partnership partners must pay individual income tax on the basis of “business income”. Income tax, the tax rate is 5%-35%.
In practice, if the transfer of equity investment involves millions, tens of millions, or hundreds of millions, many taxpayers need to pay personal income tax at the highest tax rate of 35%.
3. Actual conditions and hazards approved for expropriation
It can be seen from the above-mentioned current regulations that when investors make equity investments through sole proprietorship partnerships, under the circumstances that the tax law can “penetrate” them, they cannot save tax as some “tax financing masters” boast.
However, in practice, many people have achieved actual tax-saving effects through the "shareholding platform" of sole proprietorship partnerships. The core reason lies in the "approved collection". This tax-saving model is not as mysterious and noble as the "Tax Financing Masters" boasted.
Through the approved collection, the actual tax burden is directly converted from 20% or the tax rate 5%-35% into a few percentage points. Multiply the income by the "income rate" and then the tax rate. For example, if the approved "income tax rate" is 10%, multiplied by the 20% tax rate or 5%-35%, the actual tax burden is directly reduced by 90%.
Since there are fewer taxes, why would the government or the tax bureau be willing to do this?
Everyone needs to understand our country’s fiscal system. Local governments are like brothers and sisters in a big family. Whoever finds the money and is filial to the "Mother Yang" belongs to them. Brothers and sisters of the big family, some are poor, some are rich, some want to dig other people’s "walls", and want to put other people’s money into their own "pockets", so they silently give everywhere "Mother Yang is more generous." Policies, all kinds of messy preferential policies have come out, as long as you can put a little money of others into your own "pockets" you can make money.
In the beginning, the poorer "brothers" played like this. Because of being "poor", "Mother Yang" sometimes opens and closes her eyes. Finally, the rich "brothers" took a look and found that this was impossible. My money was given to the "poor buddies", so the "rich buddies" also started to play this set, and finally everyone started to play this set.
When everyone started to play like this, everyone started to return to the same "starting line", "poor buddies" can no longer afford to play "rich buddies". the reason is simple. "Brother Poor" means "poor", something that is often unspeakable. When they say it well, they often default or even "close the door and hit the dog", and their reputation is not high. The "rich brothers" are wealthy, good-spoken, and have a good reputation. Investors are not fools, of course they will choose well-known ones. Finally, money began to flow to the "rich second generation."
Originally, the "poor buddies" wanted to dig the corner of the "rich buddies", but the "rich buddies" ransacked their wool! No way, this is also one of the economic laws. Money just likes to go where there is a lot of money.
In the year of famine, everyone's "harvest" were not good, and the "poor buddies" were ransacked by the "rich buddies". They can only complain to the "little mother", and the "little mother" has to intervene to ensure a common prosperity.
Therefore, this policy is not a New Deal. In the past, there were many similar requirements (such as cleaning up preferential policies in various places), mainly for tax fairness and maintaining the seriousness of tax laws.